Performance over time benchmark blog post (#3146)
duckdb/duckdb-web: _posts/2024-04-10-benchmarks-over-time.md

(When writing these queries, it felt like going back in time!)

## Benchmark design

### Summary

* H2O.ai, plus import/export and window function tests
* Python instead of R
* 5GB scale for everything, plus 50GB scale for group bys and joins
* Median of 3 runs
* Using a Macbook Pro M1 with 16GB RAM
* DuckDB Versions 0.2.7 through 1.0.0
    * Nearly 3 years, from 2021-06-14 to 2024-06-03
* Default settings, except temp directory is set

### H2O.ai as the Foundation

This post measures DuckDB's performance over time on the H2O.ai benchmark for both joins and group by queries.
Please see our previous [blog](https://duckdb.org/2023/04/14/h2oai.html) [posts](https://duckdb.org/2023/11/03/db-benchmark-update.html) for details on why we believe the H2O.ai benchmark is a good approach!

The result of each H2O.ai query is written to a table in a persistent DuckDB file.
This does require additional work when compared with an in-memory workflow (especially the burden on the SSD rather than RAM), but improves scalability and is a common approach for larger analyses.

> As in the current H2O.ai benchmark, categorical-type columns (`VARCHAR` columns with low cardinality) were converted to the `ENUM` type as a part of the benchmark.

Author: Made the change by moving it to the appendix!

The time for converting into `ENUM` columns was included in the benchmark time, and resulted in a lower total amount of time (so the upfront conversion was worthwhile).
However, the `ENUM` data type was not fully operational in DuckDB until version 0.6.1, so earlier versions skip this step.

### Python Client

To measure interoperability with other dataframe formats, we have used Python rather than R (used by H2O.ai) for this analysis.
We do continue to use R for the data generation step for consistency with the benchmark.
Python is DuckDB's most popular client, so this is also the most representative of real world performance.

### Export and Replacement Scans

> However, we now extend this benchmark in several important ways. 

Author: Fixed, thank you!

We use the largest table from the join benchmark as the raw data for these new tests to help with comparability to the rest of the benchmark. 

Window function benchmarks are much less common than more traditional joins and aggregations, and we were unable to find a suitable suite off the shelf. 
These queries were designed to showcase the variety of uses for window functions, but there are certainly more that could be added.
We are open to your suggestions for queries to add, and hope these queries could prove useful for other systems!

Since the window functions benchmark is new, the window functions from each of the queries included are shown in the appendix at the end of the post.

### Workload Size

We test only the middle 5GB dataset size for the workloads mentioned thus far, primarily because some import and export operations to external formats like Pandas must fit in memory (and we used a Macbook Pro M1 with only 16GB of RAM). 
Additionally, running the tests for 3 year's of DuckDB versions was time-intensive even at that scale, due to the performance of older versions.

### Scale Tests

> However, using only 5GB of data does not answer our second key question: "What scale of data can it handle?"!

Author: Fixed, thank you!

We also ran only the group by and join related operations (avoiding in-memory imports and exports) at the 5GB and the 50GB scale. 
Older versions of DuckDB could not handle the 50GB dataset when joining or aggregating, but modern versions can handle both, even on a memory-constrained 16GB RAM laptop.
Instead of measuring performance, we measure the size of the benchmark that was able to complete on a given version.

### Summary Metrics

With the exception of the scale tests, each benchmark was run 3 times and the median time was used for reporting results.
The scale tests were run once and produced a binary metric, success or failure, at each data size tested. 
As older versions would not fail gracefully, the scale metrics were accumulated across multiple partial runs.

### Computing Resources

All tests use a Macbook Pro M1 with 16GB of RAM.
In 2024, this is far from state of the art! 
If you have more powerful hardware, you will see both improved performance and scalability.

### DuckDB Versions

Version 0.2.7 was the first version to include a Python client compiled for ARM64, so it was the first version that could easily run on the benchmarking compute resources. 

> Version 1.0.0 is the latest available at the time of publication, although we also provide a sneak preview of an in-development feature branch.

Author: At the time I had run it, I was pointed at feature! Things move pretty fast around here...haha. 

It would be maybe an hour of work to re-run the analysis on main and re-output all the charts if that would be better. (it would take ~5 hours of runtime if we redo the scale one, so that would have to wait to run overnight).

> Version 1.0.0 is the latest available at the time of publication, although we also provide a sneak preview of an in-development feature branch.

Author: Keeping feature due to timing!

### Default Settings

All versions were run with the default settings. 

> The only small exception to this was specifying a temporary directory to enable intermediate calculations to spill to disk.

Author: Then I set that setting when I didn't need to! I will omit the mention of it, since I effectively just changed the directory rather than set it.

> The only small exception to this was specifying a temporary directory to enable intermediate calculations to spill to disk.

Author: Thanks!

DuckDB focuses on the entire data analysis workflow, not just aggregate or join performance.
CSV parsing has seen significant gains, import and export have improved significantly, and Window functions have improved the most of all.

What was the slight regression from December 2022 to June 2023? 
Window functions received additional capabilities and experienced a slight performance degradation in the process.
However, from version 0.9.0 onward we see substantial performance improvement across the board for window functions. 
If window functions are filtered out of the chart, we see a smoother trend. 

You may also notice that starting with version 0.9 in September 2023, the performance appears to plateau. 
What is happening here? 
First, don't forget to zoom in! 
Over the last year, DuckDB has still improved over 3x!
More recently, the DuckDB Labs team focused on scalability by developing algorithms that support larger than memory calculations. 
We will see the fruits of those labors in the scale section later on!
In addition, DuckDB focused exclusively on bug fixes in versions 0.10.1, 0.10.2, and 0.10.3 in preparation for an especially robust DuckDB 1.0. 

> The pre-0.9 trend is a better indicator for the future now that those two major milestones were accomplished!

Author: Yes, those were the two! I can clarify that. 

I also agree that multi-threading only happens once, so I will reword that a bit.

> The pre-0.9 trend is a better indicator for the future now that those two major milestones were accomplished!

Author: Feel free to reopen this or reword things, but it is better than before at least!

            Plotly.plot( perf_over_time_csv_reader_area, parsed_json.data, parsed_json.layout );
            });
</script>

DuckDB has invested substantially in building a [fast and robust CSV parser](https://duckdb.org/2023/10/27/csv-sniffer.html).
This is often the first task in a data analysis workload, and it tends to be under valued and under-benchmarked. 
DuckDB has **improved csv reader performance by nearly 3x**, while adding the ability to handle many more csv file formats automatically.

### Group By

<div id="perf_over_time_group_by_area" style="width:100%;height:400px;"></div>
<script>
    fetch('{{ site.baseurl }}/data/perf_over_time_group_by_area.json')
        .then(res => res.json())
        .then(parsed_json => {
            let perf_over_time_group_by_area = document.getElementById('perf_over_time_group_by_area');
            Plotly.plot( perf_over_time_group_by_area, parsed_json.data, parsed_json.layout );
            });
</script>

Group by or aggregation operations are a critical OLAP workload, and have therefore received substantial focus in DuckDB, **improving over 12x in the last 3 years**.

> In version 0.3.1, multithreaded aggregation was enabled by default, providing a significant speedup.

Author: I can do that, sure! I had to make a mapping of it for the script anyway. The first draft had used a by-version chart instead of by time, but I should have updated the language!

> In version 0.3.1, multithreaded aggregation was enabled by default, providing a significant speedup.

Author: Made these changes, thank you!

In version 0.5.1 we see significant improvements driven by switching from Pandas to Apache Arrow as the recommended in-memory export format.
DuckDB's underlying data types share many similarities with Arrow, so data transfer is quite quick.

Parquet export performance has improved by 4-5x over the course of the benchmark, with dramatic improvements in versions 0.8.1 and 0.10.2. 
Version 0.8.1 added [parallel parquet writing](https://github.com/duckdb/duckdb/pull/7375) while continuing to preserve insertion order.

The change driving the improvement in 0.10.2 was more subtle.
When exporting strings with high cardinality, DuckDB decides whether or not to do dictionary compression depending on if it reduces file size. 
In 0.10.2 onward, the [compression ratio is tested after a sample of the values are inserted into the dictionary](https://github.com/duckdb/duckdb/pull/11461), rather than after all values are added.
This prevents substantial unnecessary processing for high cardinality columns where dictionary compression is unhelpful.

#### Exporting Apache Arrow vs. Pandas vs. Parquet

> <div id="perf_over_time_export_arrow_pandas_parquet" style="width:100%;height:400px;"></div>

Author: In all of the plots except for the specific Arrow/Pandas/Parquet plots, I have a cutoff point (version 0.5.1) where before that, I use Pandas and afterwards I use Arrow. That was to try and mirror the real world where folks probably wouldn't move over to Arrow until it was better, and partially to avoid having that big spike in the summary graphs. 

So the purpose of that plot is to include that big spike and show when Arrow starts to beat Pandas. 

That sound ok, or still not something you want included?

> <div id="perf_over_time_export_arrow_pandas_parquet" style="width:100%;height:400px;"></div>

Author: oh, looking more closely, I think that may just be a mistake on my side. Let me double check.

> <div id="perf_over_time_export_arrow_pandas_parquet" style="width:100%;height:400px;"></div>

Reviewer: I tried to take the cutoff into consideration but even that didn't explain it.

> <div id="perf_over_time_export_arrow_pandas_parquet" style="width:100%;height:400px;"></div>

Author: Ok, I double checked, and the differences are:
* That 0.5.1 Pandas/Arrow cutoff 
* Area vs. line like you mentioned
* The line plot uses seconds instead of a relative measure, so that it is easier to add/remove series on

I would like to keep it in if possible since I think it tells an interesting story. Are there changes you would like me to make to clarify things a bit?

Also, totally agree on the placeholder - I will fix that now!

> <div id="perf_over_time_export_arrow_pandas_parquet" style="width:100%;height:400px;"></div>

Reviewer: I still do not understand the two plots in my [original comment](https://github.com/duckdb/duckdb-web/pull/3146#discussion_r1650371546), and in particular I don't understand how the cutoff works. If we change from Pandas to Arrow at version 0.5.1, than the starting point of the area "Export group by results to Arrow" in the top diagram should be 0.5.1. But it stretches across the entire version timeline, including versions prior to 0.5.1.

> <div id="perf_over_time_export_arrow_pandas_parquet" style="width:100%;height:400px;"></div>

Author: Placeholders fixed on those 2 Pandas/Arrow/Parquet plots!

> <div id="perf_over_time_export_arrow_pandas_parquet" style="width:100%;height:400px;"></div>

Author: Gabor had some great comments, so I've added placeholder zeroes in the area charts (so that when you filter on just 1 series, you can see the correct date axis), and I added in some explanations for the line charts to explain why they are different. Thanks!

<div id="perf_over_time_scale_by_time" style="width:100%;height:400px;"></div>
<script>
    fetch('{{ site.baseurl }}/data/perf_over_time_scale_by_time.json')
        .then(res => res.json())
        .then(parsed_json => {
            let perf_over_time_scale_by_time = document.getElementById('perf_over_time_scale_by_time');
            Plotly.plot( perf_over_time_scale_by_time, parsed_json.data, parsed_json.layout );
            });
</script>

In version 0.9.0, launched in September 2023, [DuckDB's hash aggregate was enhanced to handle out-of-core (larger than memory) intermediates](https://github.com/duckdb/duckdb/pull/7931).
The details of the algorithm, along with some benchmarks, are available in [this blog post](https://duckdb.org/2024/03/29/external-aggregation.html). 
This allows for DuckDB to aggregate 1 Billion rows of data (50GB in size) on a Macbook Pro with only 16GB of RAM, even when the number of unique groups in the group by is large. 
This represents at least a 10x improvement in aggregate processing scale over the course of the 3 years of the benchmark.

> DuckDB's hash join operator has supported larger than memory joins since version 0.6.1. 

Author: I think it may have been the progress bar causing a huge log file in some way. I didn't investigate further though!

> DuckDB's hash join operator has supported larger than memory joins since version 0.6.1. 

Reviewer: Thanks. This is not too important so we can drop this comment if you want to.

However, an important question to answer when selecting a system is whether the size of your data can be handled within the size of your compute resources.

### Limitations of Benchmarking over Time

There are some limitations when looking at the performance of a system over time.
If a feature is brand new, there is no prior performance to compare to!
As a result, this post focuses on fundamental workloads rather than DuckDB's ever-increasing set of integrations with different lakehouse data formats, cloud services, and more.

The code used to run the benchmark also avoids many of DuckDB's [Friendlier SQL](https://duckdb.org/docs/guides/sql_features/friendly_sql) additions, as those have also been added more recently. 
(When writing these queries, it felt like going back in time!)

## Benchmark Design

### Summary

* H2O.ai, plus import/export and window function tests
* Python instead of R
* 5GB scale for everything, plus 50GB scale for group bys and joins
* Median of 3 runs
* Using a MacBook Pro M1 with 16GB RAM
* DuckDB Versions 0.2.7 through 1.0.0
    * Nearly 3 years, from 2021-06-14 to 2024-06-03
* Default settings

> 

Reviewer 2: Should there be somewhere some pseudocode like:

```python
for v in duckdb_versions:
     pip install duckdb --version=v
     time python3 mytest.py
```
or whatever equivalent?

Author: Well, unfortunately it is a fair bit uglier than that! I had to diagnose which versions of Pandas and Arrow would be compatible (using release dates and some trial and error). So it's 200-300 lines of Python to loop through all the versions and kick things off, and an 800 line Python script to run all of the benchmarks.

Author: I'm going to close this for now, although we want to eventually share the code. Here is the repo I have been using for my analysis - it needs to be cleaned up a bit (some paths are hardcoded, etc.). I made it public, but I don't think I want to link to it in the blog.

https://github.com/Alex-Monahan/duckdb_benchmarks_over_time

### H2O.ai as the Foundation

This post measures DuckDB's performance over time on the H2O.ai benchmark for both joins and group by queries.

> Please see our previous [blog](https://duckdb.org/2023/04/14/h2oai.html) [posts](https://duckdb.org/2023/11/03/db-benchmark-update.html) for details on why we believe the H2O.ai benchmark is a good approach!

Reviewer 2: H20.ai has been updated recently, I will also put the stable website somewhere.

Author: Oh, thank you!

Author: I added the link you sent - thanks!

The result of each H2O.ai query is written to a table in a persistent DuckDB file.
This does require additional work when compared with an in-memory workflow (especially the burden on the SSD rather than RAM), but improves scalability and is a common approach for larger analyses.

As in the current H2O.ai benchmark, categorical-type columns (`VARCHAR` columns with low cardinality) were converted to the `ENUM` type as a part of the benchmark.
The time for converting into `ENUM` columns was included in the benchmark time, and resulted in a lower total amount of time (so the upfront conversion was worthwhile).
However, the `ENUM` data type was not fully operational in DuckDB until version 0.6.1, so earlier versions skip this step.

### Python Client

To measure interoperability with other dataframe formats, we have used Python rather than R (used by H2O.ai) for this analysis.
We do continue to use R for the data generation step for consistency with the benchmark.

> Python is DuckDB's most popular client, so this is also the most representative of real world performance.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Python is DuckDB's most popular client, and it's my preferred tool to hack things together.```
Or equivalent, I would not put down an objective reason (that looks a bit weak to me) but go with something that says that writing Python is easier on you.

Author: Fair point! I can make that change - it was a significant factor... :-)

Author: Adjusted! Thanks!

Window functions are a critical workload in real world data analysis scenarios, and can stress test a system in other ways.
DuckDB has implemented state of the art algorithms to quickly process even the most complex window functions.
We use the largest table from the join benchmark as the raw data for these new tests to help with comparability to the rest of the benchmark. 

Window function benchmarks are much less common than more traditional joins and aggregations, and we were unable to find a suitable suite off the shelf. 
These queries were designed to showcase the variety of uses for window functions, but there are certainly more that could be added.
We are open to your suggestions for queries to add, and hope these queries could prove useful for other systems!

Since the window functions benchmark is new, the window functions from each of the queries included are shown in the appendix at the end of the post.

### Workload Size

We test only the middle 5GB dataset size for the workloads mentioned thus far, primarily because some import and export operations to external formats like Pandas must fit in memory (and we used a MacBook Pro M1 with only 16GB of RAM). 

> Additionally, running the tests for 3 year's of DuckDB versions was time-intensive even at that scale, due to the performance of older versions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Additionally, running the tests for X different DuckDB version was time-intensive even at that scale, due to the performance of older versions.
```
I would put an explicit number on how many versions in total.

Author: Happy to do that!

Author: Made the change, thanks!

All operators are supported, including sorting, aggregating, joining, and windowing. 
Future work can further test the boundaries of what is possible with DuckDB's out-of-core support, including window functions and even larger data sizes. 

## Conclusion

In summary, not only is DuckDB's feature set growing substantially with each release, DuckDB is getting faster very fast! 
Overall, performance has improved by **14 times in only 3 years!**

Yet query performance is only part of the story!
The variety of workloads that DuckDB can handle is wide and growing wider thanks to a full-featured SQL dialect, including high performance window functions.
Additionally, critical workloads like data import, CSV parsing, and data export have improved dramatically over time.
The complete developer experience is critical for DuckDB!

Finally, DuckDB now supports larger-than-memory calculations across all operators: sorting, aggregating, joining, and windowing.
The size of problem that you can handle on your current compute resources just got 10x bigger, or more! 

If you have made it this far, welcome to the flock! 🦆
[Join us on Discord](https://discord.duckdb.org/), we value your feedback!

> 

Reviewer 2: Can the data be exported as a duckdb database file, and saved somewhere?

So people can run their own queries on it?
We have a blobs.duckdb.org to host random datasets, this can easily be one of the

This implies some sort of commitment to update it, so maybe do save the scripts used in some repo somewhere.

Author: Ah, we can do that! I can provide the output as both a SQLite file and a DuckDB file (I used SQLite so that I could check on the progress of the benchmark while it was running in a separate process). Right now I have them in a few separate files, especially for the scale one since it kept running my laptop out of hard disk space... ;-). I will consolidate them.

How do I upload to blobs.duckdb.org?

I should save the scripts - good point. The results analysis are in a pair of Jupyter notebooks and they ended up getting pretty messy with all the combinations of visualizations that I tried. The script for running the benchmark is better, but I'd love a code review on that as well (but maybe should add some comments first...).
